The Bubble Game: An Experimental Study of
Speculation1
Sophie Moinas and Sebastien Pouget2
July, 2012
1We would like to thank Franklin Allen, Elena Asparouhova, Andrea Attar,
Snehal Banerjee, Milo Bianchi, Bruno Biais, Peter Bossaerts, Christophe Bisi ere,
Georgy Chabakauri, Sylvain Chassang, John Conlon, Tony Doblas-Madrid, James
Dow, Xavier Gabaix, Alex Guembel, Jonathan Ingersoll, Guo Kai, Weicheng Lian,
Thierry Magnac, Nour Meddahi, Andrew Metrick, John F. Nash Jr., Charles Nous-
sair, Thomas Palfrey, Alessandro Pavan, Gwenael Piaser, Luis Rayo, Jean Tirole,
Reinhard Selten, Paul Woolley, Bilge Yilmaz, and especially Thomas Mariotti, as
well as seminar participants in Bonn University, Luxembourg University, Lyon Uni-
versity (GATE), Toulouse University, Paris Dauphine University, the Paris School
of Economics, the London Business School, the Midwest Macroeconomics Meet-
ings, the CSIO-IDEI workshop in Northwestern University, The Wharton School of
the University of Pennsylvania, Yale University, the New York Fed, Princeton Uni-
versity, Caltech, University of Utah, and the 2011 PWC conference at UTS Sydney,
for helpful comments. An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the ti-
tle \Rational and Irrational Bubbles: an Experiment". Financial support from the
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-09-BLAN-0358-01) is gratefully acknowl-
edged. This research was conducted within and supported by the Paul Woolley
Research Initiative on Capital Market Dysfonctionalities at IDEI-R, Toulouse.
2University of Toulouse (Toulouse School of Economics and IAE), Place Ana-
tole France, 31000 Toulouse, France, sophie.moinas@univ-tlse1.fr, spouget@univ-
tlse1.fr.Abstract
We propose a bubble game that involves sequential trading of an asset com-
monly known to be valueless. Because some traders do not know where they
stand in the market sequence, the game allows for a bubble at the Nash equi-
librium when there is no cap on the maximum price. We run experiments
both with and without a price cap. Structural estimation of behavioral game
theory models suggests that quantal responses and analogy-based expecta-
tions are important drivers of speculation.
Keywords: Rational bubbles, irrational bubbles, experiments,
cognitive hierarchy model, quantal response equilibrium, analogy-
based expectation equilibrium1 Introduction
Historical and recent economic developments such as the South Sea, Mis-
sissippi, and dot com price run-up episodes suggest that nancial markets
are prone to bubbles and crashes. However, to the extent that fundamental
values cannot be directly observed in the eld, it is very dicult to empiri-
cally demonstrate that these episodes actually correspond to mispricings.1To
overcome this diculty and study bubble phenomena, economists have relied
on the experimental methodology: in the laboratory, fundamental values are
induced by the researchers and can thus be compared to asset prices. Start-
ing with Smith, Suchanek and Williams (1988), many researchers document
the existence of speculative bubbles in experimental nancial markets.2
We propose a bubble game that complements Smith et al. (1988) and is
simple enough to be analyzed using the tools of (behavioral) game theory.
Moreover, it enables to control for the number of trading opportunities thus
easing the interpretation of experimental data. The bubble game features
a sequential market for an asset that generates no cash ow (and this is
announced publicly to all market participants). The price proposed to the
rst trader in the market sequence is random and the subsequent price path is
exogenous and chosen such that most traders do not know where they stand
in the market sequence.3Traders have limited liability and are nanced by
outside nanciers. At each point in the sequence, an incoming trader has the
choice between buying or not at the proposed price. If he declines the oer,
the game ends and the current owner is stuck with the asset.
When there is a price cap (consistent with the fact that there is a nite
amount of wealth in the economy), only irrational bubbles can form: upon
receiving the highest potential price, a trader realizes that he is last in the
market sequence and, if rational, refuses to buy. Even if not sure to be last
1In this paper, we dene the fundamental value of an asset as the price at which agents
would be ready to buy the asset given that they cannot resell it later. See Camerer (1989)
and Brunnermeier (2009) for surveys on bubbles.
2The design created by Smith, Suchanek and Williams (1988) features a double auc-
tion market for an asset that pays random dividends in several successive periods. The
subsequent literature rened this design to show that bubbles also tend to arise in call
markets (Van Boening, Williams, LaMaster, 1993), with a constant fundamental value
(Noussair, Robin, Rueux, 2001) and with lottery-like assets (Ackert, Charupat, Deaves,
and Kluger, 2006), but tend to disappear when some traders are experienced (Dufwenberg,
Lindqvist, and Moore, 2005), when there are futures markets (Porter and Smith, 1995)
and when short-sales are allowed (Ackert, Charupat, Church, and Deaves, 2005).
3Our set up is inspired by the two-envelope puzzle discussed by Nalebu (1989) and,
especially, Geanakoplos (1992). The Supplementary Appendix available online relates the
bubble game to this puzzle as well as to the Saint-Petersburg paradox.
1in the market sequence, the previous trader, if rational, also refuses to buy
because he anticipates that the next trader will know he is last and will
refuse to trade. This backward induction argument rules out the existence of
bubbles when there is a price cap, if all traders are rational and rationality
is common knowledge. By increasing the level of the cap, one increases the
number of steps of iterated reasoning needed to rule out the bubble. As a
result, varying the level of the cap enables the experimenter to understand
how bounded rationality or lack of higher-order knowledge of rationality af-
fect speculative bubbles. This is of interest in light of the theoretical analyses
of Morris, Rob, and Shin (1995) and Morris, Postlewaite, and Shin (1995)
who show that lack of common knowledge fosters bubble formation.
When the price cap is innite, bubbles can be rational because no trader
is ever sure to be last in the market sequence. Proposing an experimental
analysis of rational bubbles is dicult because extant theories in which bub-
bles are common knowledge involve innite trading opportunities and innite
losses.4 5The bubble game overcomes these diculties: there is a nite num-
ber of trades and the potentially innite losses are concentrated in the hands
of outside nanciers who are consequently not part of the experiment.
Our experiment features various treatments depending on the existence
and the level of a price cap. Subjects participate in only one treatment and
in a one-shot game.6Our experimental results are as follows. First, bubbles
arise whether or not there is a cap on prices. Bubbles thus form even if
they would be ruled out by backward induction. Second, the propensity for
a subject to enter a bubble increases with the distance between the oered
price and the maximum price. We refer to this phenomenon as a snowball
eect, and show that it is related to a higher probability not to be last and
4Such an innite number of trading opportunities may derive from innite horizon
models (see, for example, Tirole (1985) for deterministic bubbles, Blanchard (1979) and
Weil (1987) for stochastic bubbles, Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003), and Doblas-Madrid
(2012) for clock games), or from continuous trading models (see Allen and Gorton, 1993).
5The theoretical analyses of Allen, Morris, and Postlewaite (1993), and Conlon (2004)
show that rational bubbles can occur with a nite number of trading opportunities and
without exposing participants to potentially innite losses. These analyses however involve
asymmetric information regarding the asset cash ows. In order to be in line with the lit-
erature on experimental bubbles, we design an experiment in which there is no asymmetric
information on the asset payo. Because trading is not continuous, asset prices as well as
potential gains and losses have to grow without bounds for a bubble to be sustained at
equilibrium (see Tirole, 1982).
6The Supplementary Appendix reports two robustness experiments. In the rst ex-
periment, the same treatments are used but the game is now repeated ve times with
stranger matching. In the second experiment, a one-shot game experiment is organized
with executive MBA students. Experience with the game or in business does not eliminate
speculation in the bubble game.
2to a higher number of steps of iterated reasoning.
Dierent explanations based on various generalizations of the Nash equi-
librium can be put forward to explain these results. First, because the bub-
ble game involves introspective and iterated reasoning, one could think of
the Cognitive Hierarchy (hereafter CH) model of Camerer, Ho, and Chong
(2004). This model considers that players underestimate other agents' so-
phistication (see, for example, Camerer and Lovallo (1999) for evidence con-
sistent with such underestimation in an experimental entry game). Second,
because the game requires longer and longer chains of belief formation when
a player is further away from the maximum potential price, one could also
expect the Quantal Response Equilibrium (hereafter QRE) of Mac Kelvey
and Palfrey (1995) to be relevant. The QRE captures strategic uncertainty
and its propagation across nodes of the game (see, for example, Mc Kelvey
and Palfrey (1998) for an application of the QRE to the centipede game).
Finally, because players in the bubble game dier according to the trans-
action price they are oered, various types of analogy classes arise quite
naturally. The Analogy-Based Expectation Equilibrium (hereafter ABEE)
of Jehiel (2005) could thus be pertinent (see Huck, Jehiel, and Rutter (2011)
for evidence consistent with players using analogy reasoning in normal form
games).7Our theoretical analysis shows that each of these three generaliza-
tions can account for the main stylized fact from the experiment, namely,
the existence of bubbles even when there is a price cap and the presence of
a snowball eect. One of the main contribution of the present paper is then
to test which of these explanations is most likely from an empirical point of
view. This enables us to learn more about the nature of speculation in the
bubble game.
We estimate various specications of two models of bounded rationality:
the Subjective Quantal Response Equilibrium (hereafter SQRE) of Rogers,
Palfrey, and Camerer (2009), and the Analogy-Based Expectation Equilib-
rium (hereafter ABEE) of Jehiel (2005). The SQRE is an equilibrium concept
in which agents depart from Nash equilibrium due to less than perfect payo
responsiveness (players might not always choose the best response to their
beliefs regarding other players' behavior) or due to erroneous expectations re-
garding other players' payo responsiveness. The SQRE nests the QRE that
features less than perfect payo responsiveness but rational expectations,
and the CH model that features perfect responsiveness but underestimation
7In the ABEE logic, agents use simplied representations of their environment in order
to form expectations. In particular, agents are assumed to bundle nodes of the game into
analogy classes. Agents then form correct beliefs concerning the average behavior within
each analogy class.
3of other players' one.8Estimating SQRE and its various nested models, we
show that speculation in the bubble game is related to quantal responses
rather than to cognitive hierarchies. Since each subject plays only once, it is
somehow surprising that equilibrium considerations embedded in QRE (and
also in ABEE, see below for the results) matter to explain behavior in our
experiment. The best-tting specication in this class is a Heterogeneous
Quantal Response Equilibrium (hereafter HQRE) that generalizes the QRE
to take into account the fact that payo responsiveness varies across subjects.
The ABEE oers an interesting complementary point of view on the bub-
ble game.9Bianchi and Jehiel (2011) indeed suggest that the ABEE logic
can generate bubbles in an environment in which they do not arise if all
traders are commonly known to be perfectly rational. Our experiment en-
ables us to test what type of analogy classes best explains speculation in the
bubble game. Our results show that an ABEE with two analogy classes, one
including the traders who know they are not last and the other including
the remaining traders, has a t that is not signicantly dierent dierent at
5% from the HQRE when estimated on the data from treatments in which
not all players know their position in the market sequence.10The main mes-
sage of the paper is thus that both stochastic choices and analogy classes are
important drivers of speculation in the bubble game.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section compares
the bubble game to the previous literature. Section 3 presents the bubble
game and the Bayesian Nash predictions. Section 4 derives the behavioral
game theory predictions using SQRE, and ABEE logics. The empirical re-
sults are in Section 5. Section 6 concludes and provides potential extensions.
2 Literature review
The bubble game in which agents trade sequentially can be viewed as a
generalization of the centipede game in which not all players know where
8Both the SQRE and the ABEE as well as their various specications are introduced
more precisely in Section 4 of the paper.
9When estimating ABEE, we follow Huck, Jehiel, and Rutter (2011) and consider that
agents play noisy best responses to their beliefs regarding other traders' behavior.
10The t of ABEE with two classes is signicantly lower than the one of the HQRE
when estimated on the entire data that includes an additional centipede-like treatment in
which all players know where they stand in the market sequence. Augmenting the ABEE
to include potential heterogeneity in individual payo responsiveness improves the t of
the ABEE but not signicantly.
4they stand in the sequence.11 12The bubble game shares some features with
the centipede game. On the one hand, because of limited liability, the sum
of traders' potential gains increases as the bubble grows. On the other hand,
when there is a price cap, the game can be solved by backward induction.
There are however several important dierences between the bubble game
and the centipede game. First, our generalization enables the existence of
a bubble equilibrium when there is no cap on prices, without relying on
an innite horizon game. Second, since traders play only once, there is
no reputation building considerations in the bubble game. Third, in the
bubble game, traders are oered a price at which they can buy. This price
reveals information which enables them to perform inferences regarding their
position. This informational ingredient is not present in the centipede game.
These conceptual dierences have important consequences from an ex-
perimental point of view. First, one can perform a bubble experiment in
an environment in which there actually exists a bubble equilibrium. Sec-
ond, the absence of reputational issues eliminates one potential explanation
for behavior that is not really relevant for bubbles from an empirical per-
spective. Third, the informational aspect of our game opens the scope for
behavioral regularities that are not present in the centipede game. In partic-
ular, we show that QRE is better at explaining speculative behavior than CH
which is the opposite to what has been previously found on the centipede
game.13The relative importance of quantal responses compared to cogni-
tive hierarchies for bubbles is a novel empirical nding that opens interesting
perspectives for the understanding of speculative behavior.
Our experimental analysis is also related to Lei, Noussair and Plott (2001)
and to Brunnermeier and Morgan (2010).14Lei, Noussair and Plott (2001)
use Smith et al. (1988)'s design and show that, even when they cannot
11See, for example, Mc Kelvey and Palfrey (1992) for an experimental analysis of the
centipede game.
12This is related to the absent-minded centipede game proposed by Dulleck and
Oechssler (1997): in a classic centipede game, some agents suer from imperfect recall
and may not realize that they have reached the end of the game. The bubble game is
dierent in the sense that even traders with perfect recall may not know where they stand
in the sequence, and that price information received by traders enables further inference
regarding their position.
13See, for example, the experimental investigations of the centipede game by Mc Kelvey
and Palfrey (1992) who apply the QRE logic, and by Kawagoe and Takizawa (2010) who
apply the CH logic and argue that it better ts the data than the QRE logic.
14A related analysis of bubbles is oered by Palfrey and Wang (2012) who experimentally
study speculation due to traders' dierential interpretation of public signals. A recent
working paper by Asparouhova, Bossaerts, and Tran (2011) study bubbles in a laboratory
experiment in which the asset payo is determined by the result of a centipede game.
5resell and realize capital gains, some participants still buy the asset at a
price which exceeds the sum of the expected dividends. This behavior is
consistent with risk-loving preferences or violation of dominance. We extend
Lei et al. (2001)'s analysis in the sense that, in our design, i) risk preferences
cannot explain speculation by agents who are oered the maximum price
(and thus cannot resell), and ii) one can observe the behavior of traders who
need to perform one, two and even more steps of iterated reasoning to nd
out that speculating is not an equilibrium.
Brunnermeier and Morgan (2010) study clock games both from a theo-
retical and an experimental standpoint. These clock games can indeed be
viewed as metaphors of \bubble ghting" by speculators, gradually and pri-
vately informed of the fact that an asset is overvalued. Speculators do not
know if others are already aware of the bubble. They have to decide when
to sell the asset knowing that such a move is protable only if enough spec-
ulators have also decided to sell. Their experimental investigation and ours
share two common features. First, the potential payos are exogenously
xed, that is, there is a predetermined price path. Second, there is a lack
of common knowledge over a fundamental variable of the environment. In
Brunnermeier and Morgan (2010), the existence of a bubble is not common
knowledge. In our setting, the existence of the bubble is common knowl-
edge but traders' position in the market sequence is not. There are several
dierences between our approach and theirs. A rst dierence is the time di-
mension. The theoretical results tested by Brunnermeier and Morgan (2010)
depend on the existence of an innite time horizon. They implement this
feature in the laboratory by randomly determining the end of the session.
By contrast, we design an economic setting in which there could be bubbles
in nite time with nite trading opportunities, even if traders act rationally.
A second dierence is that our experimental design also enables the study of
irrational bubbles. A third dierence is that we account for the formation of
rational and irrational bubbles by showing that bounded rationality models
can explain observed behavior.
3 The bubble game
This section proposes a simple experimental design in which bubbles may or
may not be ruled out by backward induction. This design features a sequen-
tial market for an asset whose fundamental value is commonly known to be
0. There are three traders in the market.15Trading proceeds sequentially.
15We could have designed an experiment with only two traders per market. However,
this would have required higher payments for bubbles to be rational. Indeed, the condi-
6Each trader is assigned a position in the market sequence and can be rst,
second or third with the same probability1
3. Traders are not told their posi-
tion in the market sequence but can infer some information when observing
the price at which they are oered to buy.
Prices are exogenously given and are powers of 10.16For simplicity, we
do not include the issuer of the asset in the present experimental design.
The rst trader is oered to buy at a price P1= 10n. The power nfollows
a geometric distribution of parameter1
2, that is P(n=j) =1
2j+1, withj2
N. The geometric distribution is useful from an experimental point of view
because it is simple to explain and implies that the conditional probability
to be last in the market sequence is equal to 0 if the proposed price is 1 or
10, and is equal to4
7otherwise.17If a trader decides to buy the asset at price
Pt, he proposes the asset to the next trader at a price Pt+1= 10Pt.
In order to prevent participants from discovering their position in the
market sequence by hearing other subjects making choices or by measuring
the time elapsed since the beginning of the game, subjects play simultane-
ously. Once P1has been randomly determined, the rst, second and third
traders are simultaneously oered prices of P1,P2, andP3, respectively.18If
they decide to buy, they automatically try and resell the asset.
Each trader is endowed with 1 unit of capital. Additional capital may be
required in order to buy the asset at price Pt>1. This additional capital
(that is,Pt 1) is provided by an outside nancier. The experimenter plays
the role of the outside nancier for all players. Payos are divided between
the trader and the nancier in proportion of the capital initially invested: a
fraction1
Ptfor the trader, and a fractionPt 1
Ptfor the nancier. Consider a
trader who decides to buy the asset at price Pt. When he is unable to resell,
his nal wealth is 0 which corresponds to the fundamental value of the asset.
The outside nancier also ends up with 0. When the trader is able to resell
the asset, he gets1
Ptpercent of the proceed Pt+1= 10Ptand thus ends up
tional probability to be last would be higher. We could also have chosen to include more
than three traders per market. We decided not to do so in order to have a suciently high
number of observations at the dierent price levels.
16We have chosen prices to be powers of 10 in order for the prot in case of a successful
speculation to compensate for the loss incurred in case of a failed speculation. If there
were more traders in the market sequence, the probability to be last would decrease and
price explosiveness could be lower.
17The probabilities to be rst, second or third conditional on each price, which are
computed using Bayes' rule, are given to the participants in the Instructions.
18This experimental procedure corresponds to the strategy method. When a trader does
not accept to buy the asset, subsequent traders end up with their initial wealth whatever
their decision. The advantage of this method is that we can observe traders' speculation
decision even if a bubble does not actually develop.
7with a nal wealth of 10. The outside nancier ends up with 10 Pt 10.19
The separation of payos between traders and outside nanciers allows
implementing limited liability in the experiment: the maximum potential
loss of a trader is 1. The potentially innite gains and losses are incurred
by nanciers. However, nancing all the traders and also playing the role of
the issuer, the experimenter faces a maximum total payment, per cohort of 3
subjects, of 20. This maximum payment occurs when all subjects decide to
enter the bubble. The experimenter is thus not subject to bankruptcy risk.
The timing of the bubble game is depicted in Figure 1.20Speculating is
protable for trader jif the following individual rationality (IRj) condition
is satised:
[1 P(last)]P(next trader buys) Uj(10)
+f[1 P(last)]P(next trader doesn't buy) + P(last)gUj(0)Uj(1) ,
where P(last) is the probability that the trader is last in the market sequence
conditional on the price he is being proposed, and Uj(:) is his utility function.
In order to study how traders' rationality inuences speculation, we in-
troduce a cap K= 10kon the rst price, with k2N. With three traders
only, the cap Kon the rst price translates into a cap of 10k+2= 100Kon
the highest potential price in the bubble game. The Bayesian Nash equi-
librium is as follows. If Kis nite, upon being proposed a price of 100 K,
an agent understands that he is last in the market sequence. Consequently,
his individual rationality condition cannot be satised and he refuses to buy.
Anticipating this refusal, agents who are proposed lower prices also refuse
to buy, even if they are not sure to be last in the market sequence. At the
Bayesian Nash equilibrium, a bubble never forms, being ruled out by back-
ward induction.21This establishes a connexion between the bubble game
and the previous experiments initiated by Smith et al. (1988) that focus on
irrational bubbles.
19When traders are self-nanced, payos' absolute values are scaled up by Pt. Intro-
ducing traders' limited liability and outside nanciers undoes this scaling. This change
has some relevance from a practical point of view because most traders do have limited
liability and invest other people's money. This change can also have some consequences
for behavior in our experiment (as well as in practice): the stakes being smaller than when
they are self-nanced, traders might have more incentive to enter into bubbles.
20This timing does not correspond to the extensive form of the game. Indeed, it leaves
aside the issue of which player is rst, second, or third. The extensive-form game is
provided in Appendix A for the two-trader case. When there is no cap on the rst price,
it includes an innite number of nodes.
21With a cap on prices, everyone not buying is in fact the unique rationalizable strategy
prole.
8? ? ? Figure 1: Timing of the bubble game.
The bubble game features a sequential market in which traders are protected by limited
liability and nanced by outside nanciers. Question marks emphasize the fact that traders
are equally likely to be rst, second or third, and to be oered to buy at prices P1,P2, or
P3, respectively. This gure displays traders' payo only. In case of successful speculation,
traders' payo is 10 because prices are powers of 10 and traders invest one unit of capital.
Appendix A provides the extensive-form game for the two-trader case.
The bubble game complements this previous literature because we can
varyKto study how the number of iterated steps of reasoning needed to
reach the Nash equilibrium inuences speculation. When the proposed price
isP= 100K, an agent knows that he is last and no iterated step of reasoning
is needed. When the proposed price is P= 10K, a subject knows that he is
not rst in the market sequence (he can be second or third). At equilibrium,
he has to anticipate that the next trader in the market sequence (if any)
would not accept to buy the asset. One step of iterated reasoning is thus
needed to derive the equilibrium strategy. More generally, when the proposed
price is 1P100K, the required number of iterated steps of reasoning
islog10 100K
P
. In order to study whether this required number of iterated
steps of reasoning aects bubble formation, we have chosen to experimentally
study treatments in which Kequals 1, 100, and 10,000.
Another interesting aspect of our design is that we can let Kgo to in-
nity. A bubble can arise at equilibrium if the (IRj) condition is satised
for all traders on the market. It is straightforward to show that, if traders
anticipate that other traders speculate, there indeed exists increasing and
concave utility functions Uj(:) for which this (IRj) condition holds. The
bubble game thus oers an economic environment in which rational bubbles
can form despite the number of trades being nite and the existence of the
bubble being common knowledge. Hence our paper contributes to the litera-
ture on rational bubbles by showing that neither innite trading horizon (see
Blanchard (1979) and Tirole (1982)) nor innite trading speed (see Allen and
9Gorton (1993) and Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003)) are necessary for com-
mon knowledge rational bubbles to exist.22The possibility of equilibrium
bubbles in our setting arises because no trader is ever sure to be last in the
market sequence.23
In order to show that the bubble equilibrium is meaningful, we now check
whether nanciers are willing to fuel the bubble. It is clear that, if the same
nancier provides capital to all traders (as it is the case in the experiment),
his total expected prot would be negative. However, we show below that,
if each trader has a dierent outside nancier, these nanciers may have
an interest in providing capital to traders. Assuming that a nancier has a
utility function denoted by Uf(:) and an initial wealth denoted by W, his
individual rationality condition (IRf) is written as:
[1 P(last)] P(next trader buys) Uf(W+ 10Pt 10)
+f[1 P(last)]P(next trader doesn't buy) + P(last)g
Uf(W Pt+ 1)Uf(W) ,
for allPt. It is again straightforward to show that, if nanciers expect
that all traders speculate, there exist functions Uf(:) for which the (IRf)
condition holds.
The experimental protocol is as follows. Our baseline experiment in-
cludes a total of 234 subjects. Subjects are junior and senior undergraduates
in Business Administration at the University of Toulouse. Each subject par-
ticipates in only one session and receives a 5-euro show-up fee. Each session
includes only one replication of the trading game. Subjects' risk aversion is
measured thanks to a procedure inspired from Holt and Laury (2002). We
adjust their questionnaire to match the set of potential decisions subjects
actually face in our experiment. This enables us to measure risk aversion
in a context that is in line with the experimental set up as far as payos
and probabilities are concerned.24The minimum, median, maximum, and
average gains in the experiment are respectively 0, 1, 10, and 3.35 euros (not
22In the previous models, two dimensions of innity were required for bubbles to emerge
at equilibrium: innite trading opportunities and potentially innite prices. We show that
only this last dimension of innity is necessary for common knowledge rational bubbles to
arise at equilibrium.
23It is straightforward to show that a no-bubble equilibrium always exists. The Supple-
mentary Appendix proves the existence of a bubble equilibrium for the risk neutral and
constant relative risk aversion cases. It also oers a more extensive theoretical analysis of
the bubble game including a welfare analysis.
24The questionnaire is composed by a table with 14 decisions. For each decision i,
subjects may choose between the riskless option A, which is to receive 1 euro for sure,
or the risky option B, which is to receive 10 euros with probabilityi
14, or 0 euro with
probability14 i
14. This questionnaire features what Harrison, List and Towe (2007) refer
10including the show-up fee). The instructions for the case where K= 10;000
are in Appendix B.
Our experimental protocol is summarized in Table I.
Session # Subjects cap on initial price, K Bayesian Nash Equilibrium
1, 5, and 9 60 1 no-bubble
2, 6, and 10 54 100 no-bubble
3, 7, and 11 63 10,000 no-bubble
4, 8, and 12 57 +1 no-bubble or bubble
Table 1: Experimental protocol.
4 Behavioral game theory predictions
This section analyzes the game with various behavioral game theory models.
The next section structurally estimates these models using data from the
bubble game. Two types of models appear relevant in our context: the Sub-
jective Quantal Response Equilibrium (hereafter SQRE) of Rogers, Palfrey,
and Camerer (2009), and the Analogy-Based Expectation Equilibrium (here-
after ABEE) of Jehiel (2005). On the one hand, the SQRE is of interest here
since i) it is based on the concept of noisy best-response that proved useful to
explain failures of backward induction in previous experiments (see Camerer
(2003)), and ii) it allows for heterogeneity in agents' rationality that could be
an important driver of bubble formation. On the other hand, the ABEE is
relevant here because i) speculation heavily relies on beliefs' formation that
is at the heart of this equilibrium concept, and ii) candidates for analogy
classes arise naturally in the bubble game.
4.1 Subjective Quantal Response Equilibrium
According to the SQRE logic, an agent's payo responsiveness, denoted by
i;s, depends on his type iand on his level of sophistication, denoted by s.
SQRE then involves a stochastic choice model whereby the agent's propensity
to choose an action has a logistic form that depends on the expected prot
of this action given his information, and on his payo responsiveness. The
expected payo from buying the asset conditional on being proposed a price
to as a higher frame: a risk-neutral agent switches to the risky option B in the upper part
of the table. It gives us a precise estimation of the willingness to accept the bets at stake
in the bubble game.
11Pis denoted by ui;s(BjP). The expected payo from not buying the asset
is denoted by u?. We adopt a specication with logistic stochastic choice
functions so that the probability that agent ibuys the asset after being
proposed a price Pis:Pi;s(BjP) =ei;sui;s(BjP)
ei;sui;s(BjP)+ei;su?.
In the SQRE logic, agent i's payo responsiveness is given by: i;s=
i+s;where it is commonly known that iis uniformly distributed over
the interval [ 
2;+
2], and where represents the sensitivity of an agent's
payo responsiveness to his level of sophistication. The level of sophistication
sfollows a Poisson distribution with density function f. Letdenote the
average level of sophistication.
Finally, in the SQRE logic, agents may not have the same understanding
of the overall population of players. In particular, it is assumed that an
agent with sophistication scannot imagine that other agents can have a
sophistication greater than s . The agent's truncated beliefs about the
fraction of h-level players is thus gs(h) =f(h)Pmax(s ;0)
i=0f(i). The expected payo
from buying the asset conditional on being proposed a price Pcan thus be
written as: ui;s(BjP) = 10 [1 P(lastjP)]Pmax(s ;0)
h=0gs(h)Pi0;h(Bj10P).25
Overall, SQRE has ve parameters: , the basic payo responsiveness;
, the uncertainty surrounding the basic payo responsiveness; , the av-
erage level of sophistication; , the sensitivity of payo responsiveness to
sophistication; and , the imagination parameter.
One advantage of using the SQRE is that it nests various interesting be-
havioral game theory models. In particular, when  = 0, = 0,= +1
and= 1, the SQRE boils down to the Cognitive Hierarchy model (here-
after CH) developed by Camerer, Ho and Chong (2004) with only one free
parameter . The CH model states that agents best-respond to mutually
inconsistent beliefs: they believe that all other agents' sophistication is lower
than theirs.26Moreover, agents with a level of sophistication s= 0 choose
25Given our experimental design, subjects play a simultaneous-move game in which
decisions matter only if previous traders in the market sequence, if any, decide to buy
the asset. We calculate expected payos conditional on this event in order to simplify
equilibrium computations. An alternative specication is to compute expected payos
ex-ante, that is, taking into account the probability that previous players, if any, decide to
buy. We checked that, when estimated on the entire data, the quantal response equilibrium
has a better t with our specication than with the ex-ante specication (p-value is 0.00
with a Vuong test).
26The level-kmodel of Stahl and Wilson (1995) and Nagel (1995) also exhibits such
downward looking beliefs. The dierence between these models and the CH model is that
they assume that agents believe that all other agents have a level of sophistication that
is just below theirs. See also Costa-Gomes, Crawford, and Broseta, (2001), Costa-Gomes
and Crawford (2006), and Crawford and Iriberri (2007) for experimental studies of the
level-kmodel.
12each available action with an equal probability. Alternatively, when = 0,
= +1, and when = 0 or= 0, the SQRE corresponds to the Quan-
tal Response Equilibrium (hereafter QRE) of Mc Kelvey and Palfrey (1995)
with only one free parameter . The QRE takes into account the fact that
players make mistakes but it retains beliefs' consistency. At equilibrium,
players are responsive to payos to the extent that more protable actions
are chosen more often. Using the SQRE enables us to study whether noisy
best-responses with beliefs consistency or best-responses with beliefs incon-
sistencies best explain speculation in the bubble game.
Another advantage of the SQRE is that the QRE and CH models can be
extended to take into account heterogeneity across agents. The CH model
can be extended to a (discretized) Truncated Quantal Response Equilibrium
(hereafter TQRE) by freeing the parameter . As a result, we have a CH
model in which agents, instead of best-responding, have a payo responsive-
ness that increases with their level of sophistication. Likewise, the QRE can
be extended to a Heterogeneous Quantal Response Equilibrium (hereafter
HQRE) by freeing the parameter . We then have a QRE in which agents
do not know for sure what the exact level of payo responsiveness of another
agent is.27Both of these extensions can prove useful to understand whether
heterogeneity across agents plays a role for bubble formation.
A last advantage of the SQRE is that is can be used to estimate whether
overcondence matters for speculative bubbles. The limited imagination pa-
rameterindeed represents the extent to which agents underestimate the
average level of sophistication in the population of players, a phenomenon
we refer to overcondence because it is similar in spirit to the better-than
average eect in the psychology literature. Starting from the CH model and
freeing the parameter , we can estimate the extent to which agents suer
from limited imagination. We call this model the overcondence CH (here-
after OCH). positive corresponds to a high level of overcondence because
agents believe that all other players are less sophisticated than they are.
Whenis negative, agents conceive that other players may be more sophis-
ticated than them but they are still underestimating the average level of
sophistication due to their truncated beliefs. In the limit, when converges
to 1, there is no overcondence.
We now apply the SQRE to the bubble game. For brevity, we focus here
on the QRE and CH models for treatments with a nite price cap K.28
27Uncertainty about other traders' payo responsiveness can be interpreted as uncer-
tainty about their level of risk aversion.
28The computations for the general specication of the SQRE as well as for the case
in whichK= +1are available in the Supplementary Appendix. Extending the CH and
QRE models to incorporate traders' heterogeneity as modeled in the TQRE and HQRE
13We rst study the QRE. After being proposed a price P= 100K, a
trader perfectly infers that he is last in the market sequence and buys with
probability P(BjP= 100K) =1
1+e. After observing a price P= 10K, a
trader infers that he has a specic probability, denoted by q(K;P = 10K),
not to be last. He correctly anticipates that the probability to buy of the
last trader is not equal to zero. His expected payos from buying is u(BjP=
10K) =q(K;P = 10K)1
1+e10. His probability to buy is therefore
P(BjP= 10K) =1
1+e
1 10q(K;P=10K)
1+e. Applying this logic backward, we
nd the predicted probability that a trader buys at all potential prices. This
analysis shows that the QRE can predict the existence of bubbles even when
there is a price cap.
Consider now the CH model. When proposed a price of 100 K, a trader
knows he is last in the sequence. Consequently, only level-0 traders buy, with
probability1
2. Given that there is a fraction f(0) =0e 
0!of such traders in
the population, the probability to observe a trader buying at this price is:
P(BjP= 100K) =1
2e .
When a trader is being proposed a price P= 10K, he infers that he is
penultimate in the sequence. If he is a level-0 trader, he buys with probability
Ps=0(BjP= 10K) =1
2. If he is a level- splayer with s1, he thinks that the
next trader observing the price 100 Kis a level-hwith probability gs(h) =
f(h)Ps 1
i=0f(i). Consequently, his expected prot if he buys is: us1(BjP= 10K) =
q(K;P = 10K)f(0)Ps 1
i=0f(i)1
210. The trader is strictly better o buying
if and only ifPs 1
i=0i
i!<5q(K;P = 10K). Given thatPs 1
i=0i
i!is strictly
increasing in s, there exists a (potentially innite) threshold s1 such that
only traders with a level below or equal to sbuy. This is because higher
level traders have a more accurate perception of the distribution of lower-level
types. Finally, given the actual distribution of traders' types, the probability
to observe a trader buying at a price of P= 10Kis:P(BjP= 10K) =
1
2e +Ps=s
s=1 s
s!e 
, which is greater than P(BjP= 100K). As before, the
rest of the model is solved backward. The CH model can thus predict the
existence of bubbles despite the presence of a price cap.
4.2 Analogy-Based Expectation Equilibrium
According to the ABEE logic, agents use simplied representations of their
environment in order to form expectations. In particular, agents are assumed
models does not change the underlying logic. For the case in which K= +1, we derive
predictions by relying on equilibrium conjectures that are realized at equilibrium as it is
the case for the derivation of the Nash equilibrium.
14to bundle nodes of the game into analogy classes.29Agents then form correct
beliefs concerning the average behavior within each analogy class. Following
Huck, Jehiel, and Rutter (2011), we consider that agents apply noisy best-
responses to their beliefs.30
In the bubble game, two types of analogy classes arise naturally. On
the one hand, traders may use only one analogy class, assuming that other
traders' behavior is the same across all potential prices. On the other hand,
traders may use two analogy classes: one class (Class I) that includes prices
at which traders are sure not to be last in the market sequence, the other
(Class II) that includes the remaining prices (at which traders think they
may be last or know they are last).
We now apply the ABEE to the bubble game. For brevity, we restrict
our attention to the case in which the price cap is K= 1 (the other cases are
addressed in the Supplementary Appendix). Let p1,p2, andp3denote the
actual probability that a trader buys after observing prices equal to 1, 10,
and 100, respectively. Let P(BjP= 1),P(BjP= 10), and P(BjP= 100) be
the corresponding probabilities as (mis)perceived by traders using analogy
classes.
We start by analyzing the one-class ABEE. A trader after observing a
priceP= 100 knows he is last. Consequently, his probability to buy is
p3=1
1+e. A trader after observing a price P= 10 has the following ex-
pected payo from buying: u(BjP= 10) = 10P(BjP= 100). Because
of the use of one analogy class, we have P(BjP= 100) =p1+p2+p3
3.31The
probability to buy after P= 10 is therefore: p2=1
1+e(1 10
3(p1+p2+p3)). A
trader after observing a price P= 1 has an expected payo of u(BjP=
1) = 10P(BjP= 10) = 10p1+p2+p3
3. The probability to buy is therefore:
p1=p2. This analysis leaves us with a system of equations that can be solved
numerically to nd p1,p2, andp3.
We now turn to the two-class ABEE. As before, a trader after observing
a priceP= 100 buys with a probability p3=1
1+e. A trader after observing
a priceP= 10 has the following expected payo from buying: u(BjP=
29Consistent with Jehiel (2005) when he studies endogenous analogy grouping (in page
100), we consider that an agent's bundling includes his own nodes.
30The ABEE concept with stochastic choice remains dierent from the QRE given that,
in the ABEE logic, agents have inaccurate expectations regarding other players' behavior.
One can thus test whether this inaccuracy helps explaining the data.
31The probability1
3corresponds to the ex-ante probability of observing prices of 1, 10 or
100. Given our experimental design in which all agents have to pick an action irrespective
of whether previous players have decided to buy or not, using this ex-ante probability is
in line with the spirit of ABEE. If we had chosen an experimental design corresponding to
the extensive representation of the game, we would have P(BjP= 100) =p1+p1p2+p1p2p3
1+p1+p1p2.
1510) = 10P(BjP= 100). Because Class II is a singleton, we have P(BjP=
100) =p3. Thus, we have p2=1
1+e(1 10p3). A trader after observing a price
P= 1 uses Class I to form his expectations and thus has an expected payo
ofu(BjP= 1) = 10P(BjP= 10) = 10p1+p2
2. The probability to buy is
therefore:p1=1
1+e(1 5(p1+p2)). The system of equations can again be solved
numerically.
Overall, one can show that the ABEE can predict the presence of a bubble
even when there is a price cap. A bubble can also arise at equilibrium in
the ABEE logic even if agents best-respond to their beliefs, that is, even if
 = +1.32
4.3 Implications of the behavioral game theory models
for speculative bubbles
We use the derivations provided in the previous subsections in order to high-
light the implications for speculative bubbles of the various behavioral game
theory models we consider. For simplicity, we focus on the case in which
K= 1 and on the speculative behavior after observing P= 10 andP= 100,
the last two consecutive prices.
The QRE predicts that the probability to buy is P(BjP= 10) =
1 +e
1 10
1+e 1
after observing P= 10, and P(BjP= 100) =
1 +e 1after observing
P= 100. The propensity to speculate when P= 100 is pretty low because
traders can only loose when buying the asset. It is higher when P= 10
because there is a chance that the next trader will buy. This higher chance
of reselling induces a higher propensity to speculate.33The snowball eect in
the QRE model is thus due to the fact that the initial noise due to stochastic
choice is amplied when stepping back away from the maximum price. The
QRE predicts a snowball eect when K= +1.
The CH model predicts that P(BjP= 10) =1
2e +Ps=s
s=1 s
s!e 
and
thatP(BjP= 100) =1
2e .sis the highest level of sophistication ssuch
32For example, one can check that the following strategy prole is an ABEE with one
analogy class: traders buy after observing prices of 1 and 10 and do not buy after observing
a price of 100. With two analogy classes, the following prole is an ABEE: traders buy
after observing a price of 1 and do not buy after observing prices of 10 and 100.
33It is not always true that, in the QRE, P 
BjP= 10i
>P 
BjP= 10i+1
. Con-
sider, for example, the general case with a cap Kin which the probability that trader
iis not to be last after observing P= 10iis denoted by q(K;P = 10i). We have
P 
BjP= 10i
=h
1 +e(1 10q(K;P=10i)P(BjP=10i+1))i 1
. Ifq(K;P = 10i) is low enough
compared to q(K;P = 10i+ 1), it is possible that P 
BjP= 10i
<P 
BjP= 10i+1
.
16that the inequalityPs 1
i=0i
i!<5 is satised. This inequality indicates that
an agent with sophistication sis better o speculating. The propensity to
speculate when P= 100 is pretty low because only step-0 players buy with
probability1
2. It is higher when P= 10 because some agents with higher
levels of sophistication also decide to speculate. The snowball eect in the
CH model is thus due to an increase in the willingness to speculate of more
sophisticated agents. Contrary to the QRE, for K= +1, the CH model does
not predict a snowball eect. Indeed, all traders have the same propensity
to buy for all prices: traders with s > 0 always speculate while traders
withs= 0 speculate with probability1
2. Our experiment thus constitutes a
stringent test for the CH model.
To understand the implications of ABEE for the bubble game, we focus
on the one-class ABEE. This model predicts that a trader speculates with
probability p2=
1 +e
1 10
3h
(1+e) 1+2p2i 1
after observing P= 10, and
p3=1
1+eafter observing P= 100 (p1, the probability to buy after observing
P= 1, is equal to p2). For example, for  = 1, numerical computations yield
p1=p2= 0:999 andp3= 0:269. Because of analogy-based expectations,
the trader who observes P= 10 believes that the probability that the next
trader buys isp1+p2+p3
3instead ofp3. In the case we consider, such erroneous
beliefs induces him to overestimate the probability that the next trader buys
which increases his propensity to speculate.34This reinforces the snowball
eect above what would be predicted by the QRE, even in the case in which
K= +1.
5 Empirical Results
5.1 The determinants of speculation in the bubble game
We study individual decisions to buy the overvalued asset. Figure 2 plots,
for each treatment, the proportion of buy decisions for each price level. The
number of times a given price has been proposed is indicated at the bottom
of the bar. Below the horizontal axis, we explicitly indicate, for each price,
the number of steps of reasoning required to reach equilibrium as well as the
conditional probability not to be last.
34It is not always the case that, in ABEE, traders overestimate the likelihood that
the next trader speculates. Consider, for example, the two-class ABEE with K= 100.
The trader observing P= 10 anticipates that the next trader is in Class II and that his
probability to buy isp3+p4+p5
3. Ifp3> p4andp3> p5, then the actual probability that
the next trader buys p3is higher than the expected probabilityp3+p4+p5
3.
17Figure 2: Data and predictions from behavioral game theory models.
Experimental data on the probability of a Buy decision, depending on the initial price, the
probability not to be last and the number of steps of iterated reasoning. Predictions from
behavioral game theory models use the parameters of interest estimated on the entire data
set.
Let's rst focus on the treatments with a cap on the rst price. The
rather high probabilities to buy in these treatments (Figure 2, Panels A, B
and C) are inconsistent with Nash equilibrium. Keeping the probability not
to be last constant, it seems that traders are more likely to buy when more
steps of reasoning are required (for example, compare the proportion of buy
decisions when traders are sure not to be last in Figure 2, Panels A, B, and
C). This is in line with previous experimental results on the centipede game.
35
Also, keeping the number of steps of reasoning constant, it seems that
traders are more likely to buy when their probability not to be last increases
(for example, compare the proportion of buy decisions for 3 and 4 steps
of reasoning in Figure 2, Panel B and C). This is a new empirical result
that could not meaningfully be obtained in the centipede game because the
probability not to be last is equal to 1 for each node except the last one at
which it is 0. This result indicates that there is some elements of rationality
35When the price proposed to subjects is 1, the propensity to buy is very high (100% of
subjects choose to buy when the price cap is greater than 1). This propensity to deviate
from the Nash equilibrium strategy is in line with the results reported by Mc Kelvey and
Palfrey (1992) on the six-move centipede game regarding the very low proportion of games
that end up in the rst node. A high propensity to buy when being proposed a price of 1
is also observed in the robustness experiments discussed in the Supplemental Appendix.
18in subjects' decisions.
These results uncover a snowball eect: when there is a price cap, the
propensity to enter bubbles seem to increase with the required number of
reasoning steps and with the probability not to be last.
We now turn to the treatment in which there is no cap on the rst price
(Figure 2, Panel D), that is, K= +1. First, subjects who are sure not to
be last always buy the asset which indicates a higher propensity to speculate
than when there is a price cap (for example, compare the proportion of buy
decisions when traders are sure not to be last in Figure 2, Panels D, and C).
A Wilcoxon rank sum test indicates that the proportion of buy decision when
subjects are oered a price of 1 or 10 is signicantly higher when K= +1
(100%) than when there is one (77%) (the p-value is 0.034).36This is in
line with the fact that bubbles are rational when K= +1.
Second, focusing exclusively on data from K= +1, the probability to
buy appears to be statistically higher when subjects are sure not to be last
(100%) than when they can be last (54%) (the p-value is 0.001 according to
a Wilcoxon rank sum test). There is thus a snowball eect in the treatment
withK= +1. This is in contrast with the prediction of the CH model.
Third, when there is no cap and when prices are 100 or above, if partici-
pants coordinate on the same equilibrium, their decisions should be the same
for all price levels. In line with this hypothesis, using a Wilcoxon rank sum
test, we cannot reject the fact that the probability to buy is the same after
observing prices of 100, 1,000, and 10,000 (57%), and after observing higher
prices (46%) with a p-value of 0.52 (this test keeps the required number of
steps constant and equal to innity).
These three results on the treatment with no cap cannot be obtained in
an experiment with the centipede game, and underline the interest of our
design for the study of speculation.
In order to ne-tune our statistical analysis, we run a logit regression.37
The propensity to buy the overvalued asset is explained by several variables.
As can be seen in Table II, Variables 1 through 4 are constructed by inter-
acting variables that measure the number of steps of reasoning required to
reach equilibrium and the probability to be last. For example, Variable 1 is
the interaction between a dummy that indicates that the number of steps of
reasoning is 1 or 2 and a dummy that indicates that the probability to be last
is strictly included between 0 and 1. Variables 5 through 7 are constructed
36This result however does not hold if we compare the cases K= +1(100%) and
K= 10;000 (92%) (the p-value is 0.261). Besides, there is no dierence in the probability
to buy when a subject has a probability not to be last equal to3
7or1
2between the cases
K= +1(54%) and K= 10;000 (64%) (the p-value is 0.367).
37The results are the same if we run a probit regression.
19as the previous variables but also include an interaction with the level of the
price cap. The last two variables are the individual degree of risk aversion
and the oered price.38The constant reects the propensity to speculate
of subjects who are proposed to buy at the maximum price (100 K), if any.
This is useful because, since these subjects are expected not to buy, their
probability to buy can be viewed as the incompressible level of noise in our
data.39
The results are in Table II. We rst focus on the subjects who know they
are last in the market sequence. We can reject the hypothesis that these
subjects never enter the bubble. Out of the 29 subjects who knew they were
last, three bought the asset. This number is low but it is not zero. This result
is in line with the ndings of Lei, Noussair and Plott (2001) that subjects were
buying an overvalued asset even when prohibited to resell. In our framework,
these agents correspond to \step 0" subjects. Lei et al. (2001) report in page
853 that 6 out of 36 subjects made at least one dominated transaction.40
This proportion (16.7%) is slightly higher than our proportion of dominated
choices (10.3%), maybe reecting the more complicated framework used in
their experiment. We now complement their results by studying the behavior
of subjects who are further away from the maximum price and who have more
chances not to be last.
The regression analysis provides other interesting results. First, the coef-
cients of Variables 1 through 4 are signicantly positive at the one percent
level. This indicates that subjects who know they are last buy signicantly
38The coecient of risk aversion is computed assuming a constant relative risk aversion
utility function as in Holt and Laury (2002).
39The indicators that the required number of steps is 1 or 2, that it is 3 or more, that the
probability not to be last is strictly included between 0 and 1, and that is 0 are not included
in our regressors because these variables are collinear with the interaction variables that
we include. For example, by denition of step 0, the sum of variables 1 and 2 is equal to
the indicator that the required number of steps is 1 or 2. Also, given that all the subjects
who were sure not to be last decided to buy in the no cap treatment, we do not introduce
in our regressors the indicator that a subject has an innite number of required steps of
reasoning. Finally, Variables 5, 6, and 7 enable us to test whether the level of the cap
has an eect on the propensity to speculate over and above the number of required steps
of reasoning and the probability to be last. We cannot include more interaction variables
with the level of the cap because these interaction variables would have no variability. For
example, interacting Variable 1 with the no cap indicator would generate a variable that
always equals 0.
40We focus here on the experiment of Lei, Noussair and Plott (2001) during which
subjects could participate in several markets, the so-called TwoMarket/NoSpec treatment.
This is because, in this treatment, subjects could participate actively in the experiment
without being forced to participate in the bubble. This provides a lower bound for the
number of subjects who make mistakes in the market.
20 
Coefficient p-value
Constant  -1.84 0.005
1 : I Step=1 or 2  x I0<P(last)<1 1.80 0.013
2: I Step=1 or 2  x IP(last)=0 2.60 0.000
3: I Step>=3  x I0<P(last)<1 2.82 0.000
4: I Step>=3  x IP(last)=0 5.65 0.000
5 :I Step=1 or 2  x I0<P(last)<1  x I cap=10,000 0.57 0.464
6: I Step>=3  x I0<P(last)<1  x Ino cap  -0.32 0.556
7: I Step>=3  x IP(last)=0  x Icap=10,000  -0.96 0.443
Degree of risk aversion for consistent choices  - 0.62 0.249
Price  -0.00 0.451
Log likelihood  -116.22
Number of observations 234Table 2: Logit Regression of the Purchase Decision.
Ixis an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if condition xis true. The variable Step
represents the number of steps of reasoning needed to rule out bubbles. The variable P(last)
is the probability to be last in the market sequence.
less than the others. Second, a Wald test indicates that the dierence be-
tween the coecients of Variables 1 and 3 is statistically signicant with a
p-value of 0.07. Moreover, the dierence between the coecients of Vari-
ables 2 and 4 is statistically signicant with a p-value smaller than 0.01.
Keeping constant the probability to be last, subjects are thus more likely
to buy when there are 3 or more steps than when there are 1 or 2 steps of
reasoning. Third, the dierence between the coecients of Variables 1 and
2 is marginally signicant with a p-value of 0.11, and the dierence between
the coecients of Variables 3 and 4 is statistically signicant with a p-value
of 0.01. Keeping constant the required number of reasoning steps, subjects
are more likely to buy when they are less likely to be last. Finally, we nd
no additional eect on the cap, the coecients of Variables 5 through 7 be-
ing insignicant: univariate dierences exhibited in Figure 2 are thus well
captured by our Variables 1 to 4.
These results statistically establish the presence of the snowball eect: the
propensity to enter bubbles increases with the required number of reasoning
steps and with the probability not to be last. This snowball eect is not
present at the Bayesian Nash equilibrium (whether there is a cap or not) but
it can be displayed by the behavioral game theory models discussed in the
previous section. The next subsection proposes a structural estimation of
these models in order to better understand the nature of speculation in the
bubble game.
215.2 Estimating behavioral game theory models of spec-
ulation
Our results so far suggest that some players have bounded rationality and
that the formation of bubbles is related to a snowball eect. To account for
these phenomena, we estimate models that explicitly incorporate bounded
rationality: the Subjective Quantal Response Equilibrium of Rogers, Palfrey,
and Camerer (2009), and the Analogy-Based Expectation Equilibrium of Je-
hiel (2005). For each model, we estimate the parameters of interest using
maximum likelihood methods for the entire data set as well as for each treat-
ment separately.41Condence intervals are computed using a bootstrapping
procedure: using the empirical distribution of the observed data, we resam-
ple 10,000 data sets on which the parameters of interest are re-estimated.
We then choose the 2.5 and 97.5 percentile points values to construct 95%
condence intervals. When comparing the ts of two models, we use a like-
lihood ratio test when the models are nested, and Vuong (1989)'s test when
they are not.42
Table III reports our estimation results, and Figure 3 displays the sta-
tistical tests for various models' comparisons. The rst two lines of Table
III describe our data, namely, the number of observations, and the observed
average probability to buy. The next two lines show the predictions and log-
likelihoods of the Nash equilibrium under risk neutrality.43The mean choices
are generally far away from the Nash equilibrium; the observed probability
to buy is too low when there exists a bubble-equilibrium, and too high when
it does not exist.
Table III then provides the predictions and log-likelihoods of the various
SQRE and ABEE models including the Cognitive Hierarchy model and its
extension, the Truncated Quantal Response Equilibrium, and the Quantal
Response equilibrium and its extensions, the Heterogeneous QRE (hereafter
HQRE) and the one- and two-classes ABEE. For brevity, the estimation of
the Overcondence Cognitive Hierarchy model is given in the Supplementary
41For simplicity, when estimating TQRE and SQRE models, we set = 1 as in the CH
model.
42Under the null hypothesis, the probability distribution of the log-likelihood ratio statis-
tic used to test nested models is approximated by a Chi-squared distribution with degrees
of freedom equal to the dierence between the numbers of parameters in the two models,
while the probability distribution of the Vuong's statistic used to test non-nested models
is a standard normal distribution.
43We consider that traders coordinate on the bubble equilibrium when there is no cap
on the initial price. The no-bubble Nash equilibrium has a lower log-likelihood. In order
to compute the likelihoods, we assume that players choose non-equilibrium strategies with
a probability of 0.0001.
22Table 3: Estimations and goodness of t of behavioral game theory models.
23Appendix.
The results are as follows. The average level of sophistication of the
CH, estimated on the entire data set, is 0.5. This is in line with the median
estimates reported by Camerer, Ho and Chong (2004) that lie between 0.7
and 1.9, but is a little low. This low estimated suggests a high proportion
of level-0 players, around 60%. Interestingly, what drives this result is not
really the fact that traders enter too much into bubbles when they should not.
Indeed the fact that there is only around 10% of subjects who buy when they
know they are last in the market sequence suggests a proportion of level-0
players equal to 20%. What explains the high estimated proportion of level-0
players is rather the fact that subjects do not buy as much as expected by the
cognitive hierarchy model (with a higher average sophistication level) when
there is no cap on the initial price or when the cap is large. This can be
seen on Figure 2 that plots the predictions of the CH model using the best-
tting value of estimated on the entire data set. CH embeds the better
than average eect to the extent that traders believe that no other agent
does as many steps of reasoning as them. Our estimations of OCH (reported
in the Supplementary Appendix) show that, when the parameter can be
identied, we cannot reject the hypothesis that = 1, its CH restriction.
Overcondence is thus an important feature that enables the CH logic to t
our data pretty well.
The payo responsiveness  of the QRE, estimated on the entire data set,
is 0.3. This is consistent with the results of Mc Kelvey and Palfrey (1995)
who report estimates between 0.15 and 3.3. As was also the case for the CH
model, such a low value of the responsiveness parameter is required not so
much to explain why subjects buy when they should not (that is, when the
oered prices are close to the price cap, if any) but to explain why they do
not buy that much when they should (that is, when the oered prices are
low).
As shown in Figure 3 that displays the statistical tests for various models'
comparisons, the QRE ts our data better than the CH model (p-value=0.01
for the overall data). This result is interesting because Camerer, Ho and
Chong (2004) show that CH ts better than QRE for a wide variety of games.
This suggests that there is a specic aspect to the nature of speculation in
the bubble game. Moreover, this result is also at odd with those of Kawagoe
and Takizawa (2010), who compare the goodness of t of both models in
laboratory experiments of the centipede game. In order to understand why
QRE ts better than CH in the bubble game, it is interesting to focus on
the treatment with K= 1. Indeed, this treatment corresponds to a specic
centipede game with three agents playing once. In this treatment, CH ap-
pears to t better than QRE (p-value=0.046). The other treatments with
24 
 
 
 
p=0. 00 p=0. 00 p=0. 03 
p=0. 00 
Free  
p=0.01 p=0.00 
p=0.00  p=0.00  →∞  →∞  →∞
1 ==0 
=0 =0 
→∞  HQRE  TQRE  
OCH SQRE  
CH QRE 
Nash  ABEE 2 classes  p=0.0 2 p=0.07 
p=0. 01 
p=0.0 0 
p=0.12 ABEE 1 class  p=0.0 7 Figure 3: Goodness of t comparisons.
Statistical tests for various models' comparisons using parameters estimated across all treat-
ments. The arrows point towards the best model. Plain and dotted lines indicate, respec-
tively, signicant and insignicant dierences in likelihood at the 1% condence level.
K > 1 are not centipede games because some agents do not know what their
position is. In this case, the information revealed by prices enable traders
to better infer their chances not to be last and aect their expected payos.
For these treatments, QRE ts better than CH most of the time (p-values
are 0.491, 0.064, and 0.000 for Kequals 100, 10,000, and + 1, respectively).
Given that the informativeness of prices is a relevant feature from an empir-
ical point of view, this result demonstrates again the interest of our design
in better understanding the nature of speculation.
Looking at Figure 2, it appears that QRE better captures the fact that
the probability to buy when the price is higher than 100 is lower than the
one when the price is 1 or 10. In the QRE, since costlier mistakes are less
likely, this model is able to capture the drop in players' expected utility from
buying: when they are proposed a price P100, the conditional probability
to be third is greater than or equal to1
2, whereas, when they are proposed
a price of 1 or 10, the conditional probability to be third is zero. This
informational feature is present in our design but not in the centipede game,
and has behavioral consequences in the bubble game.
The most striking dierence between the t of CH and QRE arises in the
treatment with K= +1. Indeed, in this case, as explained in the theory
section and as can be seen in Figure 2, the CH model does not capture the
snowball eect while QRE does account for it.
We then estimate generalizations of the CH and QRE models. First, as
Figure 3 indicates, TQRE and HQRE improve on CH and QRE models,
respectively. This suggests that taking into account heterogeneity in payo
25responsiveness enables the models to better t data from the bubble game.
Second, the fact that HQRE better ts the data than TQRE conrms that
cognitive hierarchies are not necessary to explain speculative behavior in the
bubble game. This result is further conrmed by the SQRE estimations. On
the one hand, as shown in Table 3, the CH parameter is strictly positive in
only two treatments (those with K= 1 andK= +1) and is rather small. In
the two other treatments, we estimate that = 0, so the SQRE model boils
down to the HQRE. On the other hand, even in the former cases, a Vuong
test indicates that the dierence between the ts of the HQRE and of the
SQRE models is not signicant. Figure 3 also shows that, when these models
are estimated on the overall data, the likelihood ratio test favors the HQRE
over the SQRE. These results conrm the fact that cognitive hierarchies are
not crucial to understand speculation in the bubble game. We thus conclude
that the nature of speculation in the bubble game is related to less than
perfect payo responsiveness.
We nally estimate the ABEE models that assume traders form expec-
tations within analogy classes. We nd that the two-class ABEE ts the
bubble game data better than the one-class ABEE. Figure 3 indicates that a
Vuong test favors the two-class ABEE model with a p-value of 7%. This sug-
gests that informational aspects related to the inference on the probability
not to be last are important for speculation in our game. When estimated
on the entire data, the t of the two-class ABEE appears lower than the one
of the QRE and of the HQRE.44However, when excluding the treatment in
whichK= 1 that corresponds to a centipede game, the t of the two-class
ABEE is not signicantly dierent at 5% than the one of the QRE and of
the HQRE. Furthermore, focusing on individual treatments, the t of the
two-class ABEE is never signicantly dierent even at 10% than the one of
QRE. Compared to HQRE, it is signicantly better at 1% for K= +1and
not signicantly dierent at 5% for the other three treatments. This suggests
that analogy classes play an important role in understanding speculation as
hypothesized by Bianchi and Jehiel (2011).
The ABEE models appear better in terms of estimates' stability. Indeed,
for the SQRE model and its various specications, the parameters of inter-
est, estimated separately for each treatment, display some variability: point
estimates in Table III often vary by an order of magnitude.45For example,
44The Supplementary Appendix reports estimations of an heterogeneous ABEE model
referred to as HABEE. Allowing for heterogeneity in payo responsiveness in the ABEE
model increases the log-likelihood but this increase is not signicant.
45Such parameter estimates' variability is not unusual in structural estimations of game
theory models. For example, in his Table 3, Weizs acker (2003) reports estimates of average
payo responsiveness that lie between 1.75 and 11.33 for player j. As indicated above,
26the estimates of  vary from 0.1 to 2.7 in the QRE model and from 0.4 to 2.3
in the HQRE model. On the contrary, the estimates from the ABEE models
appear quite stable across treatments.
Our result that speculation in the bubble game appears to be related
to quantal responses and analogy classes echoes the ndings of Carrillo and
Palfrey (2009, 2011) and Camerer, Nunnari, and Palfrey (2012) on other
Bayesian games. Carrillo and Palfrey (2009) create and study the com-
promise game in which two players have to choose between ghting and
compromising. A player's payo from ghting exceeds his payo from com-
promising only if his strength, which is private information, is larger than his
opponent's one. The beauty of the compromise game is that, for any distri-
bution of strengths, it admits a unique Bayesian Nash equilibrium whereby
players always ght. Carrillo and Palfrey (2009) show that a mix between
the cursed equilibrium of Eyster and Rabin (2005) and the quantal response
equilibrium best ts behavior in the compromise game.46Carrillo and Pal-
frey (2011) and Camerer, Nunnari, and Palfrey (2012) further nd that this
cursed quantal response equilibrium also t quite well data from experiments
with private information on bilateral trading games and auctions, respec-
tively. Coarse thinking, that is an ingredient of both the cursed equilibrium
and the analogy-based expectation equilibrium, thus appears to be relevant
to understand strategic behavior in Bayesian games.
6 Conclusion
This paper proposes a novel experimental design to study speculative behav-
ior in laboratory experiments: a bubble game in which agents trade sequen-
tially and do not always know where they stand in the sequence. Our game
has a no bubble Nash equilibrium when there is a nite price cap, and an
additional bubble equilibrium when there is no price cap.
Analyzing our experimental data, some descriptive statistics show that
speculation increases with the number of steps of iterated reasoning needed
to reach equilibrium and with the probability that a subject is not last in the
market sequence. We then oer maximum likelihood estimations of various
behavioral game theory models including, but not limited to, cognitive hi-
there is also some variability in the estimates of and  oered by Camerer, Ho, and
Chong (2004) and Mc Kelvey and Palfrey (1995), respectively.
46In a cursed equilibrium, agents underestimate the correlation between players' infor-
mation and action. As noted by Jehiel and Koessler (2008), the fully cursed equilibrium
of Eyster and Rabin (2005) is equivalent to an ABEE in which analogy-classes correspond
to the private information partition.
27erarchy (Ho, Camerer, and Chong, 2004), quantal response equilibrium (Mc
Palfrey and Palfrey, 1995), and analogy-based expectation equilibrium (Je-
hiel, 2005). The main nding of the paper is that speculation in the bubble
game is related to quantal responses and analogy classes.
The experimental setting proposed in the present paper opens several av-
enues of research. It would be interesting to study whether the occurrence of
bubbles (rational and irrational) vary with the number of traders, the intro-
duction of risk in the underlying asset payo, and the level of transparency
(one could proxy for transparency by setting a non-null probability that a
trade is publicly announced). It would also be interesting to test whether the
structural estimations of behavioral game theory models would be dierent
after allowing for a high number of repetitions of the bubble game. Finally,
it could be fruitful to extend the experimental setting to cases in which the
price path and the timing are left at the discretion of traders. This would
allow testing whether traders are able to coordinate on a price path and a
timing that sustains rational bubbles.
287 Appendix
Appendix A: Extensive form of the game with two players
n=0 
n=1 N NNi
i
i-i
-i
-i
-i
-i
-i
-i(10;0) 
(0;1) 
(1;1) 
(1;1) 
(0;10) 
(1;1) 
(1;0) 
(1;1) 1/2 
1/4 1/2 
1/2 
1/2 bb
nb 
b
nb 
b
nb 
b
nb nb 
b
nb 
(10;0) 
(0;1) 
(1;1) 
(1;1) 
n=1 
n=2 Ni-i
-i
-i
-i
-i
-ii
i1/8 
1/16 
…1/2 
1/2 
1/2 (0;10) 
(1;1) 
(1;0) 
(1;1) 
(10;0) 
(0;1) 
(1;1) 
(1;1) 
(0;10) 
(1;1) 
(1;0) 
(1;1) 
At each node, Nature (N), player ior player ichoose an action. ( x;y)
represents the payos; xfor playeri, andyfor player i. Dotted lines
relate nodes that are observationally equivalent. brefers to the buy
decision,nbto the refusal decision.
29Appendix B: Instructions for the case where K= 10;000
Welcome to this market game. Please read carefully the following instructions. They
are identical for all participants. Please do not communicate with the other participants,
stay quiet, and turn o your mobile phone during the game. If you have questions, please
raise your hand. An instructor will come and answer.
As an appreciation for your presence today, you receive a participation fee of 5 euros.
In addition to this amount, you can earn money during the game. The game will last
approximately half an hour, including the reading of the instructions.
Exchange process
To play this game, we form groups of three players. Each player is endowed with one
euro which can be used to buy an asset. Your task during the game is thus to choose
whether you want to buy or not the asset. This asset does not generate any dividend. If
the asset price exceeds one euro, you can still buy the asset. We indeed consider that a
nancial partner (who is not part of the game) provides you with the additional capital and
shares prots with you according to the respective capital invested. The market proceeds
sequentially. The rst player is proposed to buy at a price P1. If he buys, he proposes to
sell the asset to the second player at a price which is ten times higher, P2= 10P1. If the
second player accepts to buy, the rst player ends up the game with 10 euros. The second
player then proposes to sell the asset to the third trader at a price P3= 10P2= 100P1.
If the third player buys the asset, the second player ends up the game with 10 euros. The
third player does not nd anybody to whom he can sell the asset. Since this asset does
not generate any dividend, he ends up the game with 0 euro. This game is summarized in
the following gure.
Buy Buy Buy 
Buy Buy Buy P1 P2 P3
(10,10,0) 
(1,1,1) (0,1,1) (10,0,1) 
30At the beginning of the game, players do not know their position in the market se-
quence. Positions are randomly determined with one chance out of three for each player
to be rst, second or third.
Proposed prices
The priceP1that is proposed to the rst player is random. This price is a power of
10 and is determined as follows:
PriceP1Probability that this price is realized
1 1/2 (50%)
10 1/4 (25%)
100 1/8 (12.5%)
1,000 1/16 (6.3%)
10,000 1/16 (6.3%)
Players decisions are made simultaneously and privately. For example, if the rst price
P1= 1 has been drawn, the prices that are simultaneously proposed to the three players
are:P1= 1 for the rst player, P2= 10 for the second player, and P3= 100 for the
third player. Identically, if the rst price P1= 10;000 has been drawn, the prices that
are simultaneously proposed to the three players are: P1= 10;000 for the rst player,
P2= 100;000 for the second player, and P3= 1;000;000 for the third player.
The prices that you are been proposed can give you the following information regarding
your position in the market sequence:
- if you are proposed to buy at a price of 1, you are sure to be rst;
- if you are proposed to buy at a price of 10, you have one chance out of three to be
rst and two chances out of three to be second in the market sequence;
- if you are proposed to buy at a price of 100 or 1,000, you have one chance out of
seven to be rst, two chances out of seven to be second, and four chances out seven to be
last in the market sequence;
- if you are proposed to buy at a price of 10,000, you have one chance out of four to
be rst, one chance out of four to be second, and two chances out four to be last.
- if you are proposed to buy at a price of 100,000, you have one chance out of two to
be second, and one chance out of two to be third.
- if you are proposed to buy at a price of 1,000,000, you are sure to be last.
In order to preserve anonymity, a number will be assigned to each player. Once
decision will be made, we will tell you (anonymously) the group to which you belong, your
position in the market sequence, if you are proposed to buy, and your nal gain.
Do you have any question?
31References
[1] Abreu D., and M. K. Brunnermeier, 2003, Bubbles and Crashes, Econometrica , 71(1),
173-204.
[2] Ackert L. F., N. Charupat, B. K. Church, and R. Deaves, 2005, Bubbles in Experi-
mental Asset Markets: Irrational Exuberance No More, mimeo .
[3] Ackert L. F., N. Charupat, R. Deaves, and B. Kluger, 2006, The Origins of Bubbles
in Laboratory Asset Markets, mimeo .
[4] Allen, F., and G. Gorton, 1993, Churning Bubbles, Review of Economic Studies , 60,
813-836.
[5] Allen, F., S. Morris, and A. Postlewaite, 1993, Finite Bubbles with Short-Sale Con-
straints and Asymmetric Information, Journal of Economic Theory , 61, 206-229.
[6] Asparouhova, E., P. Bossaerts, and A. Tran, 2011, Market Bubbles and Crashes as
an Expression of Tension between Social and Individual Rationality: Experiments,
mimeo .
[7] Bianchi, M., and P. Jehiel, 2011, Bubbles and Crashes with Partially Sophisticated
Investors, mimeo .
[8] Blanchard O., 1979, Speculative Bubbles, Crashes, and Rational Expectations, Eco-
nomic Letters , 3, 387-389.
[9] Brunnermeier M. K., 2009, Bubbles, Entry in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Eco-
nomics , edited by Steven Durlauf and Lawrence Blume, 2nd edition.
[10] Brunnermeier M. K., and J. Morgan, 2010, Clock Games: Theory and Experiments,
Games and Economic Behavior , 68, 532-550.
[11] Camerer C., 1989, Bubbles and Fads in Asset Prices: A Review of Theory and Evi-
dence, Journal of Economic Surveys , vol. 3, 3-41.
[12] Camerer C., 2003, Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction ,
Princeton University Press.
[13] Camerer C., T.-H. Ho, and J.-K. Chong, 2004, A cognitive hierarchy model of one-
shot games, Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol. 119, 861-898.
[14] Camerer C. and D. Lovallo, 1999, Overcondence and Excess Entry: An Experimental
Approach, American Economic Review , 89, 306-318.
[15] Camerer C., S. Nunnari, and T. Palfrey, 2012, Quantal Response and Nonequilibrium
Beliefs Explain Overbidding in Maximum-Value Auctions, Caltech Social Science
Working Paper no. 1349.
[16] Carrillo J., and T. Palfrey, 2009, The Compromise Game: Two-Sided Adverse Selec-
tion in the Laboratory, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics , 1, 151-181.
[17] Carrillo J., and T. Palfrey, 2011, No Trade, Games and Economic Behavior , 71, 66-87.
[18] Conlon J., 2004, Simple Finite Horizon Bubbles Robust to Higher Order Knowledge,
Econometrica , vol. 72, 927-936.
32[19] Costa-Gomes M., and V. Crawford, 2006, Cognition and Behavior in TwoPerson
Guessing Games: An Experimental Study, American Economic Review , 96, 1737-
1768.
[20] Costa-Gomes M., V. Crawford, and B. Broseta, 2001, Cognition and Behavior in
Normal-Form Games: An Experimental Study, Econometrica , 69, 1193-1235.
[21] Crawford V., and N. Iriberri, 2007, Level-k Auctions: Can Boundedly Rational
Strategic Thinking Explain the Winner's Curse and Overbidding in Private-Value
Auctions?", Econometrica , 75, 1721-1770.
[22] Doblas-Madrid A., 2012, A Robust Model of Bubbles with Multidimensional Uncer-
tainty, forthcoming Econometrica .
[23] Dufwenberg M., T. Lindqvist, and E. Moore, 2005, Bubbles and Experience: An
Experiment, American Economic Review , vol. 95, 1731-1737.
[24] Dulleck, U., and J. Oechssler, 1997, The absent-minded centipede, Economics Letters ,
vol. 55, 309-315.
[25] Eyster E. and M. Rabin, 2005, Cursed Equilibrium, Econometrica , 73, 1623-1672.
[26] Geanakoplos, J., 1992, Common Knowledge, Journal of Economic Perspectives , 6,
52-83.
[27] Harrison G., J. List and C. Towe, 2007, Naturally Occurring Preferences and Exoge-
nous Laboratory Experiments: A Case Study of Risk Aversion, Econometrica , 75,
433-458.
[28] Holt, C. A., and S. K. Laury, 2002, Risk Aversion and Incentive Eects, American
Economic Review , 92, 1644-1655.
[29] Huck, S., P. Jehiel, and T. Rutter, 2011, Feedback Spillover and Analogy-based
Expectations: a Multi-Game Experiment, Games and Economic Behavior , 71, 351-
365.
[30] Jehiel, P., 2005, Analogy-based expectation equilibrium, Journal of Economic Theory ,
123, 81-104.
[31] Jehiel, P., and F. Koessler, 2008, Revisiting Games of Incomplete Information with
Analogy-Based Expectations, Games and Economic Behavior , 62, 533-557.
[32] Kawagoe, T. and H. Takizawa, 2010, Level-K Analysis of Experimental Centipede
Games, mimeo .
[33] Lei V., C. Noussair and C. Plott (2001), Nonspeculative Bubbles in Experimental
Asset Markets: Lack of Common Knowledge of Rationality vs. Actual Irrationality,
Econometrica , 69(4), 831.859.
[34] Mc Kelvey, R. D., and T. R. Palfrey, 1992, An Experimental Study of the Centipede
Game, Econometrica , vol. 60, 803-836.
[35] Mc Kelvey, R. D. and T. R. Palfrey, 1995, Quantal Response Equilibrium for Normal
Form Games, Games and Economic Behavior , 10, 6-38.
[36] Mc Kelvey, R. D. and T. R. Palfrey, 1998, Quantal Response Equilibrium for Exten-
sive Form Games, Experimental Economics , 1, 9-41.
33[37] Moinas, S. and S. Pouget, 2012, Supplementary Appendix to \The Bubble Game:
An Experimental Study of Speculation", mimeo .
[38] Morris, S., A. Postlewaite, and H. Shin, 1995, Depth of Knowledge and the Eect of
Higher Order Uncertainty, Economic Theory , 6, 453-467.
[39] Morris, S., R. Rob, and H. Shin, 1995, p-Dominance and Belief Potential, Economet-
rica, 63, 145-157.
[40] Nagel, R., 1995, Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study, American
Economic Review , 85, 1313-1326.
[41] Nalebu, B., 1989, The Other Person's Envelope is Always Greener, The Journal of
Economic Perspectives , Vol. 3, 171-181.
[42] Noussair, C., S. Robin, and B. Rueux, 2001, Price Bubbles in Laboratory Asset
Markets with Constant Fundamental Values, Experimental Economics , 4, 87-105.
[43] Palfrey, T., and S. Wang, 2012, Speculative Overpricing in Asset Markets with Infor-
mation Flows, forthcoming Econometrica .
[44] Porter, D. P & Smith, V. L, 1995, Futures Contracting and Dividend Uncertainty in
Experimental Asset, University of Chicago Press, vol. 68, 509-41.
[45] Rogers, B., T. Palfrey, and C. Camerer, 2009, Heterogeneous Quantal Response Equi-
librium and Cognitive Hierarchies, Journal of Economic Theory , 144, 1440-1467.
[46] Smith V., G. Suchanek, and A. Williams, 1988, Bubbles, Crashes, and Endogenous
Expectations in Experimental Spot Asset Markets, Econometrica , 56, 1119-1151.
[47] Stahl, D., and P. Wilson, 1995, On Players Models of Other Players: Theory and
Experimental Evidence, Games and Economic Behavior , 10, 213-254.
[48] Tirole J., 1982, On the possibility of speculation under rational expectations, Econo-
metrica , 50, 1163-1181.
[49] Tirole J., 1985, Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations, Econometrica , 53, 1499-
1528.
[50] Van Boening, M.V., Williams, A.W., and LaMaster S. 1993. Price bubbles and crashes
in experimental call. markets. Economic Letters , 41, 179-185.
[51] Vuong, Q., 1989, Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and non-nested Hy-
potheses, Econometrica , 57, 307-333.
[52] Weil P., 1987, Condence and the Real Value of Money in an Overlapping Generations
Economy, Quarterly Journal of Economics , 102, 1-22.
[53] Weizs acker G., 2003, Ignoring the Rationality of Others: Evidence from Experimental
Normal-form Games, Games and Economic Behavior , 44, 145-171.
34